## Leading the way

After decades of rapid growth and progress fuelled by foreign investments and know-how, China is now entering a new phase of development characterised by what Wired’s reporter called as a move from ‘imitation to innovation’ (Larson, 2018).

In July 2017 State Council has announced its ambition to make China a leader in artificial intelligence (AI) and creating a 150 billion dollar AI industry by 2030, which according to some experts is a somewhat understated estimate (Mozur, 2017; Yang & Yang, 2018). The ‘New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan’ is seen as “a key impetus for economic transformation” aimed to build China’s advantage in the development of AI and to establish China as an innovative nation and global power in science and technology (Mozur, 2017). Much of this development focuses on enhancing domestic security and building a vast surveillance assemblage to monitor and control the country’s population.

As part of its push for innovation, China has chosen over 300 cities for its national smart city pilot (Li et al., 2015; Wan et al., 2015). The nation views smart city as a “key strategy to promote industrialization, informatization, and urbanization” (Li, Lin, & Geertman, 2015, p. 291). This paper argues that the intensifying surveillance capabilities, facilitated by the new technological practices and AI-enabled networked infrastructures, are often deployed under the guise of urban innovation through the use of ICT and the smart city narrative (Greenfield, 2013; Zuboff, 2015). By using surveillance as a conceptual lens for analysing adoption of emerging technologies in China, this paper aims to shed light on some of the more worrisome aspects of the widely promoted smart city narrative.