## China’s ‘Sharp Eyes’

In 2015, the Chinese Ministry of Public Security, national police force, and other agencies called for the creation of an “omnipresent, completely connected, always on and fully controllable nationwide video-surveillance network as a public-safety imperative” (Denyer, 2018; Lin, & Chin, 2017; National Reform and Development Commission, 2015). There are currently an estimated 100 million CCTV cameras installed throughout China (Yu, 2017). By comparison, the U.S. has about 50 million (Lin, & Chin, 2017). The number of  CCTV cameras is estimated to grow to over 600 million by 2020 as part of the 13th Five Year Plan that requires 100 percent surveillance and facial-recognition coverage and total unification of the existing databases across the country (Long, 2018; Vincent, 2018)

To achieve this, an ambitious plan known as ‘Xue Liang’, which can be translated as ‘Sharp Eyes’, has been established as part of China’s AI program. The plan’s name takes inspiration from the ruling Chinese Communist Party’s slogan “the people have sharp eyes” which is based on Mao Zedong’s attempt to get every citizen spying on one another (Denyer, 2018). The plan aims to connect public security cameras with private cameras and those installed in smart devices in homes and integrate them into nation-wide surveillance and data mining platform that enables real-time viewing and sophisticated video and image analyses by authorities (Denyer, 2018; Long 2018). An essential component of the infrastructure is an AI-enabled facial-recognition system that is capable of instant identification of any citizen.

Such an all-encompassing undertaking necessitates the collection of vast amounts of data which is enabled by a totalitarian regime and revolving doors between the private and public sector (Lin & Chin, 2017; Wade, 2018). China, unfettered by privacy concerns or public debate, has access to immense amounts of data - photos uploaded by country’s almost 800 million internet users and a centralised image database of citizens, all of which must have a government-issued photo ID by the age of 16 (Lin, & Chin, 2017).

This agenda is spearheaded by a trio of established internet giants Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent (sometimes called ‘BAT’) which are leading the way in the development of AI, self-driving cars and other smart city technologies. These companies are competing to market and develop surveillance systems for government use and provide Chine’s authorities with access to unprecedented amounts fine-grained data on minute details of people’s lives generated through mobile phones and sensors embedded in the various Internet of Things (IoT) devices (Lin, & Chin, 2017). The business ecosystem that sustains China’s booming surveillance infrastructure is further supported by a thriving AI startup sector where companies openly boast that “their best customers are local police bureaus” (Lin, & Chin, 2017).

The next section illustrates the pragmatic aspects of the Smart Eyes plan in the context of China’s capital.