## Full Spectrum Biometric Control

According to Zenz & Leibold (2017), the “combination of low-skilled foot-soldiers stationed in and around convenience police stations and high-tech equipment connected to extensive information processing systems has dramatically increased the Party-state’s surveillance capabilities, providing what local media claims is ‘complete coverage without any chinks, blind spots, or blank spaces’” (p. 26). The Sharp Eyes plan being implemented across the country at the moment is just one the foundational components of China’s massive effort to build an omnipresent AI-enabled surveillance apparatus.

The Sharp Eyes system is developed alongside a ‘social credit’ system that will, according to a document released by State Council “allow the trustworthy to roam everywhere under heaven while making it hard for the discredited to take a single step” (Mistreanu, 2018). The system is planned to be implemented nation-wide by 2020 with an aim to create an ecosystem “made up of schemes of various sizes and reaches, run by cities, government ministries, online payment providers, down to neighborhoods, libraries, and businesses” (Mistreanu, 2018). Under the scheme, currently being tested in the pilot city of Rongcheng, people who are considered troublemakers – such as those who have smoked on public transport, tried fare-dodging, ’spread false information’ online, or are otherwise considered a security threat or unfavourable to the ruling Communist Party – will be prevented from buying tickets for a plane or a high-speed train. By contrast, the ‘well-performing citizens’ will receive perks such as discounts on heating bills and favourable bank loans (Mistreanu, 2018; Long 2018).

Another major project labelled ‘Police Cloud’ aims to “scoop up such data as criminal and medical records, travel bookings, online purchase and […] social media comments — and link it to everyone’s identity card and face” (Denyer, 2018). This system is designed to uncover relationships between events and people ‘hidden’ to the police by enabling longitudinal analysis of spatial and behavioural patterns of individuals – tracking where have they been, who are they with, what have they been doing, as well make predictions about their future activities (Human Rights Watch, 2017a). Additionally, the government is collecting voice pattern samples of individuals with an aim to establish a national voice biometric system which will be able to identify voices in phone conversations (Human Rights Watch, 2017b). There have also been reports that Chinese authorities have been collecting DNA samples, iris scans, fingerprints and blood types in an attempt to build a comprehensive biometric database of all residents of Xinjiang – a place described as a “fortress city with technologies” that serves as a testbed for some of the most invasive and repressive smart city technologies yet (Haas, 2017; Phillips, 2018; Wade, 2018; Wang, 2017).

The practices and modalities described thus far resemble a scenario from an Orwellian science fiction novel. However, the ‘surveillance as a mode of living’ constitutes a day-to-day reality for a growing number citizens in China where people are already being identified and detained based on the systems described in this paper (Denyer, 2018; Tucker, 2012). With greater surveillance being accepted as a cost for the increased sense of security and more convenient services, a growing number of everyday activities are becoming entirely dependent on code for their socio-spatial production (Kitchin & Dodge, 2011; Webster, 2012).

China envisions a smart city designed around a spatially distinct individual and multi-modal biometric portraits of its citizens that provide, in combination with a totalitarian regime and utter disregard for privacy, a level of governmental oversight unprecedented in human history (Human Rights Watch, 2017b; Tucker, 2012).

The next section looks at these technological developments in China in the broader context of a global smart city discourse.