## Global smart surveillance assemblage

China’s growing surveillance apparatus is invasive and totalitarian to the degree that it may seem unlikely that such an approach to smart cities might establish itself in Western democracies. However, with the rapid advances in capabilities of AI, rise of predictive policing, and the revelations about the extent of NSA’s and GCHQ’s dataveillance in the recent years, it is likely that similar activities are already taking place in western countries - they have just not yet been codified into laws and policies that would allow them to be publicly acknowledged and enforced (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013; Hopkins, 2013; O’Neil, 2016; Webster, 2012; Zuboff, 2015).

China’s modus operandi for the development of its smart cities sets unsettling precedence for a panoptical ‘all-seeing’ model of disciplinary power in which the surveilled bodies become self-regulating conformist bodies (Foucault, 1991/1975; Han, 2017; Tucker, 2012). China’s push for total surveillance can be viewed from the perspective of a dominant neoliberal discursive regime that praises the use of ICT to improve “safety, security, efficiency, antifraud, empowerment, productivity, reliability, flexibility, economic rationality, and competitive advantage” (Kitchin & Dodge, 2011, p. 19). In this discourse, the inherently political decisions about the future of cities are presented as value-free and neutral through techno-centric rhetoric and a heavily-marketed ideal of the interconnected smart city (Graham & Marvin, 2001; Greenfield, 2013).

Despite sustained criticism, much of the prevailing smart city discourse is shaped by economic interests of global ICT infrastructure monopolies that are promoting solutions based on a technology that is explicitly about observing, monitoring and shaping behaviour (Graham, 2005; Greenfield, 2013; Webster, 2012). These novel AI-enabled technological assemblages are part of the surveillance capitalism ideology that “is constituted by unexpected and often illegible mechanisms of extraction, commodification, and control that effectively exile persons from their own behavior while producing new markets of behavioral prediction and modification” (Zuboff, 2015, p. 75; see also Han, 2017). Already firmly established in the production of digital spaces, this pervasive ideology is gradually permeating spatialities of everyday life that is increasingly “dominated by the cultures and biopolitics of (attempted) separation, a vast infrastructure of continuous, digital filtering and tracking, and the cultural politics of fear” (Graham, 2005, p. 576).

The global smart city agenda enacted through ‘winner-take-all’ mechanisms of surveillance capitalism is characterised by significant information asymmetries and unequal power dynamics that are poised to widen social and economic inequalities further. Due to the ubiquitous and all-encompassing nature of computing, this agenda cannot be analysed in isolation at a level of individual cities. Instead, the smart city needs to viewed as a process of ever-present urbanisation in an all-pervasive, invisible global metropolis that extends urban modalities of living to everyone, whether they live in a city or not.