## Conclusion

This paper has presented China’s smart city vision with a distinct focus on the country’s pursuit of total surveillance through an expansive AI-enabled infrastructure. Due to the relentless pace of technological buildout and rapidly evolving socio-economic landscape in the country, it is difficult to conduct a comprehensive analysis without getting bogged down with inconsequential details. Therefore, the author has situated developments in China into a broader context of global surveillance assemblage that is emerging as a constitutive part of smart city initiatives constructed around principles of surveillance capitalism.

In spite of the expanding global surveillance apparatus, the concept of surveillance is still “significantly under-deployed and underdeveloped in mainstream studies of public administration” (Webster, 2012, p. 26). Much of the critical literature seems to be reiterating familiar concepts from surveillance studies using a Foucauldian type of discourse analyses to polemicise about social issues of urban development. This approach is sometimes criticised for its over-reliance on the panoptical model of surveillance which is considered rather deterministic and applies a limited top-down power enaction perspective that fails to account for more nuanced horizontal, networked designs of peer-to-peer surveillance (Tucker, 2012).

There is also a growing body of critical urban studies literature that successfully captures much of the complexities of the contemporary smart city discourse. However, it appears unable to construct a coherent narrative that would sustain alternative visions of the future of urban life that go beyond the idealistic citizen-centric conceptualisations that lack a sufficient economic impetus to merit their adoption within our existing model of neoliberal global governance.

This paper shares some of the analytical pitfalls mentioned in the concluding section. Consequently, future work should focus on analysing possibilities for citizen-driven systemic change and methods for facilitating positive cultural change concerning smart city development.